[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If we can get
back to our essence,
I think that's where we belong.
That's home.
You've had all these
experiences in life.
And yet, there's one part of you
that was there the whole time.
That same essence,
your same awareness,
your same consciousness has
been with you this whole time,
and it's with you now.
We're still struggling
and stumbling.
Some people are
dying in the process.
sick unnecessarily.
But eventually, we've
got to get there.
And we could change
the paradigm.
We can-- we can do it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Stress.
It's a word we hear every day.
People are stressed out.
Work is stressful.
But what do we really
know about stress?
Before we can figure
that out, let's
take a quick travel back in
time starting around 70,000 BC.
Hunter gatherers had
to be on high alert
in order to survive from other
predators in their environment.
Even though this seems like
an extremely long time ago,
we actually react to stress
in the environment just
like these early people.
Let's fast forward to
early in the 17th century
to see French philosopher Rene
Descartes, who famously said,
I think therefore I am.
He is also responsible
for the idea
of mind-body dualism, which
some call the mind-body problem.
He theorized that if
the mind was a thinking
thing and the body was
a non-thinking thing,
that the mind could
exist without the body
but the body could not exist
without the mind, which
essentially declared
them as separate.
This paved the way for
many schools of thought
addressing this mind-body split.
Several decades later,
we hear the word stress
used by English natural
philosopher Robert
Hooke in engineering terms.
He was interested in
how man-made structures,
such as bridges could
be made to withstand
heavy loads without collapsing.
He created what he called
the law of elasticity, which
demonstrated how
something like a spring
could withstand a
certain amount of stress
before it reached
a breaking point.
This machine-like
analogy proved to be
fertile ground for future
explanations of how
humans experience stress.
His rival at the time,
Sir Isaac Newton,
would soon introduce
his three laws
of motion, which would
continue to point
toward a mechanistic
view of the body.
He also held a grudge
against Robert Hooke
and is responsible for why
you've probably never heard
of him.
And now, to jump ahead
to the mid 1800s.
French physician Claude
Bernard introduced the idea
that the internal environment
of living organisms
must remain fairly
constant in response
to changes in the
external environment.
Based on this work, in the early
1900s American physiologist
Walter Bradford
Cannon coined the term
homeostasis to describe this
neutral stable state that
needed to exist for
the body to survive.
He also coined the
term fight or flight,
but we'll get back
to that later.
When it comes to our current
understanding of stress,
the man responsible is Hungarian
Canadian endocrinologist Hans
Selye.
He is known for his work
studying what he called
general adaptation syndrome.
He would later coined
the term stress,
which is still used to explain
aspects of the stress response.
This response is directly
responsible for helping
the body to return
to homeostasis,
which brings us to today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Most people, when
they think of stress,
they think it's like they're
stressed out in their mind,
they're worrying about things,
they're obsessing about things.
The response part of
the stress response
is your body's response
to that stress.
So most of us walking around, we
don't put two and two together.
>> When the lay person hears
something like stress response,
they know that stress is-- they
think that stress is the cause
of their problem.
What we teach them
is stress is actually
an aggravating factor of
whatever existing weakness
they have.
Because we're all
stressed all the time.
One of the things we
want to take a look at
is that people have physical
stress, biochemical nutritional
stress, and mental
emotional stress.
People think, when
they think of stress,
it's whatever
they're stressed out
about at their job or their
career or their family
or whatever is going on
in their life personally.
But stress takes
many different forms.
So our goal is to
make sure that they
know is that all of these
things are equally important.
Your mind and your body
are the same thing.
It's not some New Age-y
kind of statement.
If you alter your mind, it's
going to alter your body.
>> If you can address a
person's stress in their life,
I feel like that
should be number one.
Because we know
that mental stress
will affect the body
in a physical way.
So so many Americans have
gastrointestinal issues.
They have stomach issues.
Their digestion's not great.
They bloat after they eat.
And yeah, there's a good portion
of that that's from food.
But we also know that
so much of our stress
goes right to our
digestive tract.
And so I've found
with many patients,
as I am addressing their food,
but more importantly, it's
also looking at what else
is going on in their life.
And it's amazing
how when they're
able to digest more of what's
going on in their life,
they're able to digest
their food better,
and everything else in the
whole system starts clearing up.
The person who has a
heart attack today,
were they healthy yesterday?
Of course not.
Were they healthy last
week or last month?
Most likely not.
But there was something
that was going
on that led to that
crisis, that heart attack.
The emotions work the same way.
They accumulate,
they accumulate,
and then something goes wrong.
>> When somebody is
under a lot of stress,
at least emotional stress, a
whole cascade of things can be
going on, from neck problems
to low back problems to stomach
problems to anxiety to--
I've seen people go
through cyclical infections
to you name it.
Stress causes almost
every condition out there.
And if we can just take some
of that emotional pressure
off their system, at least
the chemistry of that emotion,
their body has a
better chance to heal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When we're struck by
a stressor on a day that
our system is already somewhat
compromised, it's just like--
it's really like
adding, you know,
one more little teeny
tiny hair to the pile.
And it just, everything just
crumbles in that moment.
And we're very adaptable
and we're very--
you know, our nervous
systems are very intelligent,
and it figures out a way to
kind of cope and get through.
But what we often
end up doing is
developing coping
mechanisms that don't work
when we get a little bit older.
I often have patients
come in and say, oh, I'm
sabotaging myself, I don't know
why I'm doing this to myself.
And they are beating
themselves up
because these patterns
are coming into play.
But what they don't realize is
that these patterns saved them
as children.
These patterns are
survival skills that
have just gone a little wonky.
>> Where I find stress is
a really big deal for a lot
people are their own
internal thoughts.
They beat themselves up.
They don't think
they're good enough.
They feel like they
have to be perfect.
And every time they
fail at something,
they stress themselves out.
And those are the stressors
which oftentimes people don't
think they're stressed about.
So ask yourself this, if every
time you do something wrong
do you beat yourself up?
If you do that, you're
stressing yourself out.
So what we try and do is we help
people recognize those things
so that they can deal with them
a little bit more effectively
so that they don't actually
stress themselves out
internally.
>> Some people understand
that there's something called
the fight or flight syndrome.
And in the fight
or flight syndrome,
that's looking at a part of
the nervous system called
the autonomic nervous system.
>> The autonomic nervous system
is a science-y way of talking
about the part of the nervous
system that isn't the central
nervous system.
So the central nervous system
is the brain and the nerves
that connect down.
The autonomic nervous system
has two major branches,
so to speak, sympathetic,
which we call fight or flight,
and the parasympathetic,
which we could call
relaxation and restoration.
When we're in that latter mode,
the relaxation restoration
mode of our nervous system,
that's when healing occurs.
That's when the body
rejuvenates itself.
When we're in the
fight or flight mode,
we're actually getting ready to
ward off something threatening.
So we need that.
But we can't be
in it all the time
or it has negative
health effects.
>> You might be driving in
traffic and someone cuts
in front of you, your
life's not in danger,
but your body gives
the same response.
And that ties back into
the stress response.
Because when you go into that
fight or flight state of being,
your parasympathetic calming
nervous system is turned off.
That also turns of
all your healing
and resting and digesting
portion of your body.
>> And if we don't find ways of
breaking that fight or flight
response, then the symptoms
you see of too much stress,
poor digestion, can't
sleep at night, make sense.
Because you have this activated
sympathetic nervous system
that that's what it's all about.
>> So it's kind
of like, you know,
if you have a Ferrari and
you're going 140 miles per hour,
I mean that's what it's built
for, but if it goes 140 miles
per hours all day long, 24/7,
and you never stop and you
never get a chance for it to
be garaged and parked for it
to rest, that can be
damaging to the car.
So that's much like our bodies.
Well, if it's constantly
in fight or flight
and in stress mode
all the time, then it
can lead to early breakdown.
>> We need to remember
that stress is not up here.
It's whole body.
And that stress is a
physiological phenomenon,
right?
And I often will
use with patients
the example of, OK,
you know, stress
is a physiological phenomenon
that is not necessarily
in your control.
It's not about the
rational response.
So it's kind of like when
you're driving down the road,
you're going, OK, I
look at my speedometer,
my rational brain
is in front of me
and it says, OK, I'm going 55.
And then all of a sudden you
see sirens in your rear view
mirror.
And what happens?
The patients always
know, they say,
oh, well, yeah, I grip
the steering wheel,
my heart starts to
pound, sometimes I sweat,
my tummy gets butterflies.
And with that,
it's like, exactly,
that is the
physiology of stress.
Because your rational brain
looks at your speedometer
and says, oh, I'm going 55.
But you still see those sirens
and think, uh, I'm in trouble.
It's a threat.
And it's a perceived threat.
It's not necessarily real.
It's the emotional reality.
And then the police
car goes right by you.
You go, OK, phew.
But you still feel the
physiological effects
of stress.
The other part of that is that
people are so used to that
nowadays that it's normal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Neuroscientist and
pharmacologist Dr.
Candace Pert made a breakthrough
discovery in 1972 when she
discovered the opiate receptor.
It was thought for any drug
to work in your system,
it had to first bind to
receptors in your cells.
But what made this
discovery so exciting
was that it meant
that the receptor must
be used for something
created by the body,
not just for external
things like drugs.
This led to the
discovery of endorphins,
our body's very own morphine.
These discoveries
led to what she
called the molecules of emotion,
that when you have an emotion
it is the result of
physical molecules,
known as neuropeptides,
being released into your body
and attaching
themselves to receptors
in every cell of your body,
which means that emotions are
actually a physiological
phenomenon, not
a mental construct,
as we had thought.
>> Candace Pert, the
famous researcher,
actually found that there were
neurotransmitter receptors
in our gut.
In fact, there's more
neurotransmitter receptors
in our gut than there
are in our brain.
>> She taught us that the mind
is not just above the neck,
it's throughout the whole body.
And that's true.
There's intelligence in
every cell of the body.
>> Emotions, really,
as it turns out,
are physiological phenomenon,
not necessarily psychological
phenomenon.
So kind of how we
say it is that we
use these words to explain how
we feel, that we're stressed,
that this is going
on in my life,
to try and communicate
to our conscious mind
what we're experiencing.
The reality is is
that we all have
these what we would call
conditioned responses.
>> The concept of conditioning
came from the observations
of Ivan Pavlov.
He was a Russian physiologist
who conducted the famous dog
studies in the late 1800s.
While they weren't the most
ethical of experiments,
at least we were able
to learn from them.
Every time he would feed the
dog, he would ring a bell.
After doing this several
times, he simply rang the bell
without feeding the dog.
Even though there
wasn't any food,
the dog still salivated
as if food was coming.
This unconscious
physiological response
is the result of conditioning.
>> Humans, we drool our
whole life away, right?
We have these different
metaphors that people use,
like he really
pushed my buttons,
she really knows how
to pull my strings,
they did it to me,
all this kind of stuff
to really explain our
experience of what's going on.
But it's really just a
conditioned response.
And what we like
to leave everybody
with knowing is
that how it works
is what you don't
express in life,
you'll repress till it expresses
as disease or dysfunction.
It's kind of like Woody Allen
used to say, I never get angry,
I just grow a tumor.
Meaning if I don't
get my stuff out,
it stays in until it comes
out of something ugly,
either a behavior or
a health condition.
>> Symptoms can show up in
the form of like anxiety
or depression.
And in modern days,
I think people are
quick to try to take a pill.
And maybe the drug helps.
It's not to say that medication
isn't good once in a while.
But often, it's just masking
or covering up a symptom.
And maybe it helps a
person through a crisis,
so it can be good.
But if we can get to
what is the underlying
cause that keeps getting
re-triggered, lives can change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In Philadelphia, exciting
new research is being done
at the Marcus Institute of
Integrative Health at Jefferson
University, one of the
leaders in this field.
>> One of the critical pieces
of what we were doing with
our initial imaging study is
to expose people to the various
traumas and stressors that
have really created a problem
for the person.
So they actually
listen to an audio file
of these very traumatic
moments in their life.
And in particular,
we were looking
at cancer patients who
have struggled with cancer
and usually have a
very traumatic part
of either the diagnosis
or the treatment
that they just can't get rid of.
>> All of these people
physiologically reacted
to thinking about
that stressful event.
Heart rate went up or galvanic
skin response changed.
And so what we had
were people who
were physiologically reactive
and subjectively distressed
by this event, and it's been
going on for a long time.
>> So what exactly
was this study?
Dr. Monti and his
team created it
as a randomized
controlled trial.
All of the participants had
a distressing cancer-related
memory that was associated with
symptoms of traumatic stress.
These symptoms have been
intruding in their lives
for at least six months.
And for many of
the participants,
it had been years.
Each one of them made a script
explaining the traumatic events
in their own words.
That script was then
read back to them
while they were
given a functional
MRI to measure the
levels of distress
they were experiencing.
Since this was a randomized
controlled trial,
the participants had been
split up into two groups.
One group received neuro
emotional technique, or NET,
and the others were assigned to
the waitlist control condition.
The results of those
who received NET
were dramatic, to say the least.
But before we can
go any further,
we have to head over to
Encinitas, California
to meet Dr. Scott Walker.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Some of my patients
weren't getting well.
Some of them would
get well over time.
Some of them wouldn't get well.
The people that didn't get
results had a look of tension
in their eyes.
This is just something--
I came from a town
of 500 people.
And I'm so happy I
came from a small town,
because I could see
people in different ways.
And the people that seemed
to be burdened, I think,
were emotionally burdened.
And they were the ones
that had less results.
And so I made up in my
mind that maybe they
were having emotional trouble.
That's not a new thought.
People have been
thinking that people--
emotional stress has affected
the body for some time.
But I didn't know
how to solve it.
>> But as it turned out, Dr.
Walker went to a seminar where
he met a chiropractor by the
name of Dr. Jennifer Lamonica.
He learned that she would give
certain people an adjustment,
and soon after, when they
would think about work,
that their spine
would be out of place
before they even
left the office.
Hearing this reaffirmed
his suspicion
that there had to be
something else going on.
>> The first patient, on the
next day that I was home,
she had gone to work and gotten
in an automobile accident.
Now I'm still-- my mind is
not in my compassionate heart.
My mind is in my mind.
And I'm thinking, maybe she
had fear in this accident.
This is a chance I can
work this hypothesis.
And I said, oh, you
were in an accident.
I said, did you fear when
you were in the accident.
And she said, yes.
I said, oh.
I'm sure I didn't do that.
But it's the way I was thinking.
>> One of Dr. Scott's
mentors, Dr. George Goodheart,
correlated the primary muscles
of the body with the major
meridians used in
traditional Chinese medicine.
>> So you have these medians,
they're kind of like channels,
or like we call it, free--
I like to describe them
as like freeway systems.
So they run from different areas
of the body, from your head
to your toe, to your
toes back to your trunk,
to your trunk to the face.
So they all travel
across the body,
and they go even through the
deeper layers of the organs.
You know, the philosophy
is that if there
is a traffic jam or a blockage
in any of those meridians,
there's a disruption of the
vital force of the body, which
is the qi, or the blood.
>> Even though traditional
Chinese medicine has been using
meridians for
thousands of years,
a recent discovery by Auburn
University professor Vitaly
Vodyanoy is bringing more
scientific attention to this
system.
>> I didn't know all the
meridians and all the emotions,
but I knew fear
and I knew kidneys.
I said, what I want
you to do is I want
you to think about
the fear that you had
when you were in that accident.
And she said, oh, OK.
And so she did.
And I adjusted the
sequences for the kidney,
which is T1, T5, and T8.
And then I said to her, I
said, how does that feel?
I wanted to see if I
could get rid of fear.
And she thought I meant
how does her neck feel.
Of course, you know.
And she says, oh, how do I feel?
She goes, yeah,
that feels better.
And then I was ashamed.
Because I wasn't thinking
about her poor neck.
I was thinking about this
idea that I had of maybe
I could get rid of the fear.
And so I said, oh, oh, OK,
and [CLEARS THROAT] how does
the fear feel now?
She says, yeah, I don't feel
any fear about it at all now.
I said, yes, yes.
>> Any symptom that we have
really could have a stress
component.
And I think that's how
we came to develop NET.
Dr. Scott figured out
that as a chiropractor,
he would help certain problems
and help spinal conditions
or painful situations.
But there were those
certain cases that
didn't resolve all the way.
So it could be a knee or a
shoulder or a TMJ or a backache
or a stomach ache or anything.
And what, 80% would get fixed.
But what about those
20 that didn't?
>> It's really a
brilliant intervention.
I don't know how Dr.
Walker put it together,
given that there was
nothing like it at the time.
And he just somehow put together
these different concepts.
It makes sense, in hindsight,
how he put them together.
But it really required a
special brain to do that.
>> I knew I was onto something.
I knew it.
This is good.
I thought, well, there
is the placebo effect.
You've got to watch that.
I do not want to encourage
the placebo effect.
I want to discourage
So I made a pact with myself.
No more Mr. Nice Guy.
And I had this patient come
in one day, and she said,
you did that emotional thing
about this miscarriage baby
that I had.
I feel so relieved.
It was such a
cloud over my head.
I'd lost this baby.
And I said, well--
I was trying to write my
notes, and she reached over,
and I don't know what
kind of shirt I had on,
but she grabbed me and
she put her face in mine.
I said you helped me!
And there I was.
I couldn't write.
I was nose-to-nose with her.
And she said it very forcefully.
She said, I said you helped me.
And I thought, my god,
what have I become,
that I can't celebrate my
patient's win, that I can't
celebrate her joy with her.
What's happened to me?
I said, I'm going to leave the
research for the researchers.
That's it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Later, with the help of
fellow practitioners, Dr.
Scott created the ONE
Research Foundation.
They have privately funded
over 30 research studies
to date, which brings
us back to the present.
Meet one of the participants
in this study, Dr. Jim Buckley.
>> And in 2014, I got a
diagnosis of non Hodgkin's B
cell lymphoma.
And it really took
me by surprise.
I was shocked that I had come
down with something like this.
I mean, I'm a health
care practitioner.
I'm not supposed to get sick.
But I did.
And I think I was
spending so much time
taking care of everybody else
that I kind of let myself fall
by the wayside.
Conventional cancer
therapy was not anything
that I ever thought
I would use, just
because I had strong
feelings that that was not
the way to go in terms
of getting healthy again.
But as it turned out, the
tumor that I had in my abdomen
was about as big as a football.
And it was pushing on my
kidney and my intestines
and it was really
starting to cause
me an awful lot of trouble.
So I ended up doing what
I said I would never
do in getting chemotherapy.
And during the
process of that, I
found out that the ONE
Foundation was doing a research
project on the emotional
effect of hearing
that you have cancer.
And I was in that boat now.
First, they kind
of questioned me
about what was
the biggest impact
of hearing that you had cancer.
How did that impact
your life and what
was the hardest thing about it?
And I had to go down and list
what was the most difficult
for me.
What came up was hardest to
leave my wife and daughters,
feeling like I hadn't finished
the work that I was here to do
and felt as though I was
leaving them in the lurch
and felt a lot of responsibility
in terms of how I kind of had
fallen down on my self
care and was, as a result,
potentially could lose my
life and closeness with them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the things that I
heard over and over again from
participants in the study was
that these distressing memories
and experiences would intrude or
impact on positive experiences
in the present day when
they least expected it.
So they might be chopping
lettuce in their kitchen
and be suddenly
reminded or flooded
with feelings of how
stressful it was to be sick
or what it was like to be
retching over the garbage can
in their kitchen
all those years ago.
So just being in
the kitchen again
reminded them of
that earlier stress.
>> The passage of time
wasn't making it go away.
By the way, that's kind
of an old conception
that we found is incorrect.
You know, time really
doesn't heal all wounds.
Because emotional wounds
are in the part of the brain
where there is no sense of time.
>> Sometimes things happen
early in life where we are
in a dangerous situation or
something is perceived to be
awful happening.
And the body is unable to
extinguish that response
on an unconscious level.
Years later, we
find out that that
buried stress, those buried
feelings that have never
gone away, are still being
triggered in any situation that
looks the same, sounds
the same, smells the same,
feels the same can trigger
that on an unconscious level
and bring the feelings
back, even though it's
a different situation.
>> So whatever
happened to you at 7,
your subconscious still thinks
it's happening right now.
And even as a practitioner,
once I learned that,
it took me a long time to
wrap my mind around that.
but it's the truth.
>> It's not gee, now it
feels like I was then.
It is then.
There is no linear
time in that place.
So it is exactly that
moment that they're feeling.
And it's replicated just as
if it's happening right now.
>> What we were able to
observe in the brain is where
the distress was being
registered in the brain when
they listened to a script
of the traumatic event.
And that script has been
going on for a long time.
Again, I emphasize
that because it
isn't a matter of time
healing this particular wound.
The time has been going by
and going by and going by.
And the period of time of
the study was quite short.
>> All of the participants in
the study who received NET were
given treatment
over several weeks,
and some of them had their
sessions all in one day.
The findings were then
published in the Journal
of Cancer Survivorship.
>> The main finding that we
really had was that these areas
of the limbic system,
particularly the, what's called
the para hippocampus, which
is very involved in our sort
of traumatic memories
and emotional,
our negative
emotional responses.
This was an area that was
far more active initially,
and then after undergoing
the NET program suddenly
didn't really react very much.
>> It just wasn't there anymore
for most of those patients.
In fact, everybody
had some response
where there was far less to
no activation of those areas
in the limbic
brain, particularly
the hippocampal area, which is
where distressing memories sit.
The activation was
virtually gone.
>> So there was a 50% increase
in the neuron density between
the amygdala and
the frontal lobe.
Now the frontal lobe is the
front part of the brain.
And that's responsible for
long-term planning, thinking,
complex reasoning.
That's the part of
the brain that says,
everything's going
to be OK, I shouldn't
be stressed about this, this
is nothing to worry about.
And my clients and the
participants in the study
will say all the time, I say
all the right things to myself,
but it just doesn't matter.
And that's exactly true.
Because the message
isn't getting
through to the emotional brain.
>> And we also know from this
study that every time a really
distressing event
gets reactivated
or there's a reminder of
it, that your nervous system
reacts.
So when we looked
at the biofeedback,
we know that the autonomic
nervous system gets involved.
And when the autonomic
nervous system
gets hyperactivated, that has
a negative effect on health
outcomes, quality of
life across the board,
creates too much inflammation
in the system, and so on.
>> We talk about sort of the
brain normalizing itself.
And in many ways,
that is reflected
in what these scans looked
at, that instead of having
this overreaction in these
limbic areas of the brain,
the brain basically
said, OK, you know,
it's just one of my
memories now and it's not
a traumatic memory.
I don't have these horrible
feelings that come up.
And it's reflected in what
the brain looked like.
>> I was even surprised
that baseline mood,
baseline anxiety, all
of those things changed.
Like when you think about it,
the person's overall quality
of life was changed from
three to five sessions
of an intervention.
That's pretty dramatic.
>> I can tell you that I felt
physically different after
receiving the treatment.
I had had a bunch of different
treatments during my attempts
to treat the disease.
But I really felt as though
after that treatment,
I really took a turn
towards healing,
and it was physically evident.
It's just an example of
how all the work that I'd
been doing for all those
years to help other people
could actually help me, too.
It just, it reached
me in another way
that it had never reached me
before, like how impactful
and how important this work is.
I know in my heart that
this treatment really
helped to shift how I healed.
It just felt like, I can
heal this now, where before,
I didn't--
I may have thought that but I
didn't feel that in my body.
You can have all the
positive affirmations
you want and intend for
different things to happen.
And that's all cognitive.
That's all your brain talking.
But this was distinctly
different in that it
was in my gut that
I felt different.
It wasn't just a thought.
It was, I feel like
I can heal this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There is an emotional
component that happens from
being sick for long periods
of time or struggling with
physical illness or watching
someone you love face
a physical illness.
We're not floating heads.
There is a combination
that happens
where the mind and the
body work together.
And so when you have
a physical illness,
there is emotional component.
And when you're facing
emotional stress,
like depression or
anxiety, there's
a physical component to it.
And that both of those
need to be treated.
>> Sometimes people don't know
and they need that tool of NET
that utilizes not just what's
in the conscious brain,
but what physiology is doing
that actually helps us to get
at what's a little bit
less than conscious.
>> But because NET uses
several unique components,
first being the muscle testing,
which allows the body to become
its own biofeedback instrument.
The body then guides
the treatment.
By using the muscle testing,
it precisely and correctly
identifies what these
periods of distress are.
>> And what we're really
doing with the muscle test is
we're posing a concept and
then seeing if their body,
the patient's body, has
a physiological response.
We're not measuring
true and false.
We're only measuring the
person's personal reaction
to it.
So it's kind of like,
I oversimplified
would be the amoeba moving
toward a bit of food
or away from a bit of poison
that's in the Petri dish.
And that's what we're
measuring with the muscle test.
>> The experience of NET is far
different than what somebody
observing it can know.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're run so much by our
subconscious, at least 80%,
probably 99.9%, we're run
by our subconscious minds.
And therefore we're
kind of victim
to those subconscious minds.
>> Because our subconscious mind
is running so much of the show,
it can be difficult to break
out of our conditioning.
Dr. Scott explains that a neuro
emotional complex, or NEC,
is when an emotion
gets stuck in the body.
>> In the NEC, we're
shedding the old perceptions,
we're shedding the feelings
that went with them.
Usually the NEC, of
course, has something
that is perceived by us to
be non-survival oriented.
It's counter survival.
That's the way we perceive it.
And so we're shedding that.
>> So most of the time what
happens is when people come
into my office, they've had
this issue for so long that they
start to mistake the problem
that they're having as it
actually being them.
So instead of them having
anxiety, they feel anxious
and then they start to
attribute that to them just
being an anxious person.
It becomes part
of their identity.
It's that feeling
of hopelessness
that's so corrosive, I think.
And the idea for people,
the idea that there's
some hope out there
that they could actually
get to the heart of why this
is actually happening over
and over again in
their life and even
return to the place where
it becomes something,
a condition that they have
rather than who they are.
That's a great start, OK?
And then move on from there.
>> People often ask me, well,
that event doesn't seem like it
was so traumatic or
anything like that.
So why did that come up?
But I think that we
are just so bombarded
with processed foods and sugar
and lack of sleep and the news
and everything that we're
exposed to that our brain gets
overloaded.
Our nervous system gets
overloaded with the emotions
it's trying to process.
So something that seems
somewhat insignificant
may have hit us on a day
that our system was weak
and it just didn't know
what to do with it.
>> When one person years and
years later is still suffering
from the death of a parent
and then another person years
and years later is suffering
because they didn't get ice
cream at a birthday
party, it doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter.
The person who lost a
parent might have actually
adapted better than
the kid who didn't get
ice cream at a birthday party.
>> Emotions have no logic.
They're just the emotions.
If they were logical, we'd
all figure our stuff out
and no one would ever
have a health issue
or need to see a doctor or
a therapist for any reason
because we would just
think about it, go, huh,
and then we'd be fine.
Doesn't really work like that.
>> The memory stores
things, often inaccurately,
as to what really happened.
Because it's not about that.
And what it can do is it can put
associated memories together,
so that when you recount
something or retell
a story you add pieces that
really didn't even happen just
by the way our
memories store stuff.
And it doesn't matter that
it's logically correct
or that they're overly
emotional or underly emotional.
If the body's having a
physiological reaction,
we can help connect the
different piece parts
and let the body come to
closure with that thing.
>> When we do muscle testing, we
get the body's feedback and we
use that to help the body heal.
So logic and reason
oftentimes are not
involved when we're doing NET.
We're just finding out
where the body is stuck.
And sometimes there's
no way that we
would logically
ever figure it out
unless we use muscle testing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Upon further
analysis of the data,
the team at Jefferson noticed
some very interesting changes
regarding the cerebellum.
This led to the publishing of
their second paper in 2017.
>> It's kind of traditionally
been taught that the cerebellum
is primarily involved in the
coordination of our motor
activity.
So when it comes to emotions,
it's not that relevant.
It's not really helping
us with anything.
It's really just helping
us to move our hands
and to move our legs and to do
that in a coordinated fashion.
But a growing number of research
studies, as we came to find
and as we started to look
at it, we started to see,
well, gee, there's some
interesting studies
that show that when the
cerebellum is activated,
that has something
to do with the laying
down of traumatic memories.
>> According to a scientific
paper published in 2015,
titled "The Emotional
Cerebellum,"
imaging experts revealed the
cerebellum is activated during
mental recall of emotional
personal episodes and during
the learning of a conditioned
or unconditioned association
involving emotions.
>> Even though the cerebellum
is relatively small--
it's just kind of
these little, you know,
kind of balls in the
back of the brain--
it has five times the number
of neurons as the rest
of the brain combined.
And then we started to
realize, well, you know,
this is all starting
to make some sense.
If this part of
the brain normally
is involved in the coordination
of motor function maybe
it's also involved
in the coordination
of emotional function.
And if that's the case, then
perhaps what we're seeing
is that as a result of going
through the neuro emotional
technique and the various
elements that are involved
in it that we are having
a direct impact on how
that cerebellum is able
to regulate the emotional,
or help in the regulation
of these emotional centers
of the brain.
>> This is one of the reasons
to get up and go to work
as a medical researcher.
Because you don't get
to see these kinds
of results every day.
>> But it also opens up the door
even more in terms of the field
of cognitive neuroscience
and emotions and psychiatry
and psychology, because it
helps us to understand that
the cerebellum may be a very
critical area of our brain that
is very much related to our
emotional selves and not just
how our body moves, but how
our body is moved emotionally.
>> Even the people on my team
who knew nothing about NET,
they're just analyzing, doing
the quantitative analysis
of the MRIs pre and post,
they're like, what is this?
What was this intervention?
What's going on here?
Everybody was just
really thrilled
and so happy for the patients.
And of course, that's
what it's really about.
>> Even though this study
was focused on people with
traumatic stress from cancer,
the traumatic stress of going
to war is an equally
important issue.
On his third deployment
to Afghanistan,
United States Marine
Corps corporal Rory Hamill
sustained serious injuries.
>> It was February 13, 2011.
It's almost seven years now.
Took the minesweeper
off my point man's
back after we received
some information
that there was an improvised
explosive device in a compound
by our location.
And I got about 3/4
of the compound swept.
And as I was nearing
the end of my search,
I stepped on a little
metallic pressure
plate which detonated homemade
explosives five feet behind me
to the right.
And the explosion
and the blast force
came from my right side, sheared
my right leg off instantly,
clipped the back of my left leg.
I flew 10 feet in the
air, hit the ground
on the back of my head.
My Marines saved my life.
They instantly rushed right in.
I mean, there could've been
a secondary IED in there,
but they didn't care.
They dragged me out of the
blast zone, worked on me,
stopped the bleeding,
stabilized me.
Unfortunately, on the helicopter
to the shock trauma unit
I flatlined for
two minutes, and I
was resuscitated and worked
on and began the long journey
home.
It took about a week
for me to get home,
because they need
to keep you stable
when they put you
on the plane, and I
wasn't quite stable enough.
But eventually I made it
back to Washington, DC,
where I began my rehab.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's very common with amputees,
we get phantom limb pain.
That's where your
body is, I guess,
firing off synapses and trying
to remap where the nerves are.
And it realized that there was
a huge chunk of nerves missing.
But that can translate
into phantom pain,
phantom sensation.
And one of the things that
we worked on at the office
was we tried using a mirror.
It helped out a lot.
In a sense, it kind
of tricked my brain--
I'm looking at this, I have my
left leg and I'm looking at it,
and to my brain, it made sense.
And it helped,
with a combination
of the actual treatment, it
helped get a lot of that stress
away from my body.
And the phantom
pains and sensations
became very, very less frequent.
Obviously, I still have
challenges every single day.
It's very, very hard.
And over the past
almost seven years,
I've gotten a lot mentally
and physically stronger.
But NET has been an
integral part of that.
What I feel, what
I've seen with NET is
it really is a mind-body
type of therapy.
And I can personally attest
to, normally, you know,
if you have a physical thing,
you go to a physical doctor.
You have a mental thing,
you go to a mental doctor.
With NET, it hits both of
those at the same time.
And I really, really
feel that's why
there was such a
huge wave of emotion
released initially and all
the subsequent appointments
afterwards.
The doctor didn't
tell me that I was
going to be cured of my
ailments or anything like that.
It wasn't-- but he did tell me
that it would help stabilize
my body and help me get
back to a sense of normalcy
in my everyday life, which it
did, hands down, immediately.
And it only got better
with the next few sessions
and subsequently after.
It helped me a lot.
It helped me out
of a dark place,
you know, that, with the help
of family and friends as well.
It's just-- it was an amazing
supplement to my regimen,
to everything that I needed.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When the doctor's
ego is there,
it reduces the capacity
for healing in the patient.
Too often we get an idea, a
preconceived idea about what's
going on with the patient.
And how could we
possibly do that?
Because we've only
lived our own life.
We haven't lived
that person's life.
We don't know what's
going on with them at all.
And so well known by the
psychologist is people project.
People project their
loves and their hatreds.
>> As a practitioner, you can't
allow your stuff to interfere.
And as humans, it's very
easy for that to happen.
We even have
seminars that they're
designed to address the
practitioners' needs,
so that we don't have
those needs getting
in the way of the
therapeutic relationship.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There are numerous
seminars every year allowing
practitioners to learn and
improve their technique.
As of 2018, there are more
than 10,000 practitioners
in over 30 countries.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Whether they're small
distressing events that just
aren't resolving themselves
well or the big, big ones,
they all affect us.
And they affect our
quality of life.
They affect how we're
functioning, how we're feeling,
and whether or not we're
thriving in the world
the way we want to be.
>> And where 30 years ago
it was different thinking,
I think the whole face of health
care is changing and people are
more open now that what you
think could affect how you
heal, what you eat, how you
exercise, meditation, yoga,
all that kind of stuff.
And NET is just a tool.
But I think it's a
perfect time for it
because I think the
consciousness of people
in general is real open
that maybe I have something
to do with my health condition.
And if we can help unlock
what was stuck in there,
then all those other things
they're doing as well
work better too.
>> It pays it forward in
so many different ways.
Because if one
person can be less
stressed when they go home
to their family, when they
go into work, when they are on
the phone as a customer service
representative,
then all of a sudden
we have a better world,
cascading, cascading,
cascading.
>> This is a really good
time in history to be there.
It wasn't so wonderful
in the very beginning,
because we didn't know
where we were going
or what we were doing or
if it was going to work
or if it wasn't going to work.
But right now we
feel very confident
that every single
research study that we've
done, every single condition
that we've thrown this at
has been improved.
We haven't found anything
that it hasn't improved.
We don't know where
the limits are.
>> It'd be nice if it was a
mechanistic world and we just
tightened a bolt here and
there and then it worked.
But that's not.
We're way more than
a piece of machinery.
And I don't think
we've begun to touch
on the energy of what runs
the body or even, dare I say,
the spiritual piece.
>> I never wanted it to go
into a spiritual direction.
But really, I don't
know how you can stop it
when you start analyzing
what's going on in this world.
>> I think the other interesting
piece about this is healing,
healing is so interesting to me
in that we put on these layers
and layers and layers of
protection of things that
happened to us.
And then a person will
come in with a problem
and we'll start
peeling off the layers.
But what's totally
interesting to me
is the issue won't come
up until the body's
ready to deal with it.
And I know personally,
I lost my mother
when I was six years old.
And I'm sure, you
know, I've had issues.
And over the years we've
done a bunch of NET
and would often go back to
me being a six-year-old,
of course, which is
when my mother died.
And we would check the
concept of my mother
dying, committing suicide.
And it wasn't there
for almost five years.
It'd be something else.
It'd be that I had to
go stay with my aunt
or that it was my father was
so upset, or this or that.
And then interestingly,
five years into it,
on a Mother's Day, believe it
or not, I had an issue come up,
goes back to age six.
And this time, I was ready
to deal with the death
and suicide of my mother.
So I think that is so wonderful.
And it gives a level
of safety to realize
an issue is not going
to come up until you're
ready to deal with it.
>> Probably the most
interesting thing that happens,
that has happened for
me as a practitioner,
is that a person comes
in maybe for migraines,
and you start doing NET
on them for the migraines,
and then they start to tell
you the other things that are
getting better in their life.
Their relationships are better.
They're happier.
They're sleeping better.
And you didn't even take care of
those things, which again just
illustrates the amazing
healing power of the body
if you give it a chance.
if you take some of
these stress factors,
you reduce that load that
the body is carrying,
the sky's the limit as
to what it can heal.
>> The one thing that we really
are helping people become is
to become more comfortable
in their own skin.
Because if we're
comfortable in our own skin,
things are a bit less
stressful in life.
We're able to handle
things better.
We love ourself more.
And with that, there's nothing
that money or anything else
can buy except that peace
of mind with yourself.
>> Imagine how the world could
be if we could actually become
more aware of our stress and its
impact on not only our own body
and ourselves but
those around us,
and be able to hold a space of
acceptance and allow each of us
to reach our full potential
and be true authentic selves.
>> I wish that more people
were aware of this work.
Because the miracles that we
as practitioners get to see
every day are amazing.
And people don't even realize.
There's so many people out there
in this world that don't even
realize it's a possibility.
>> As a result,
as a side effect,
a wonderful side
effect from doing NET,
I started to practice
yoga and meditation,
understanding and teaching this
idea that your mind is very
powerful.
And it can help you or harm you.
And it's always your choice.
>> I would probably
be an emotional wreck.
If I never had NET, I would
probably be a mess, honestly.
And I used to be.
I used to be like my emotions
would just go up and down.
And a lot of that stuff also
correlates with your diet.
So just learning
about that stuff
was a game changer for me.
But it's helped so
much in every way.
>> Comments through your life
are stored up in your body.
And it's bringing
that emotion out
and to attack that
emotion almost loss
and release it and
diffuse it from your body
is, it's the biggest freedom.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We want people to prosper.
We want them to be better.
We want them to be healed.
And we can change the paradigm.
We can.
We can do it.
I thought, just 20
years ago, I thought
that those of us that
believed that the power that
made the body is in the
body can heal the body,
and that the body was natural
healing and that's what works,
and nobody was listening to us,
again, you know, what's new.
And I just thought, yeah, I'll
just be one of the dinosaurs.
I'm going to die
off, BUT what I'm
going to do while
I'm alive, I'm going
to keep this principle that
natural health care works.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So much of our cultural
narrative revolves around
the stresses of life and it
can make us feel powerless.
Struggles with anxiety,
depression, and chronic health
problems are becoming
more and more common.
Every one of us has been through
traumatic events in our life
and it's something that should
bring us together more instead
of disconnecting us.
There are little to no treatment
options for people suffering
from traumatic stress.
If you're not
diagnosed with PTSD
or any other major
traumatic condition,
it can seem confusing
on how to get help.
These findings are
about more than NET.
It's about helping
our society to become
more aware of our emotions
and how much they actually
affect our life and
the people around us.
The mind and the body
are intimately connected.
And the more we
can embrace that,
the more we can take
control of our health
and ultimately take
control of our lives.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Part of why brain imaging
is so valuable is that it shows
the physiological
basis of things.
And we always joke about how you
can parade 100 people in front
of a group of scientists
and they all say,
this made me feel a lot better.
But if you throw up one brain
scan picture and you say,
well, this is what their
brain looked like initially
and this is what their brain
looked like afterwards, they
say, oh, OK, something happened.
I get it.
I understand it.
Because the
subjective experiences
that people describe,
you never really know.
And of course, in a
very cynical world,
you know, every
advertisement, every group
is trying to make their
product, their approach,
their ideas sound great.
So of course, there's
a million testimonials.
And every testimonial
always says, this was great,
it changed my life,
I feel fabulous.
So that's one thing.
But to have actual
data and to be
able to do it in a controlled
trial, a randomized controlled
trial, and to be able
to see what's happening
and then more specifically, to
show the physiological effect,
that shows that there's
something else that's going on.
I mean, a person
could say to me,
I'm not having a response to it.
But you don't know exactly what
they're feeling on the inside.
And I'm not in the
scanner with them,
so they could still
be in tears and just
fighting it back better and
saying, no, I feel fine.
But they wouldn't be able to
change the brain that way.
>> Even though it's obvious
that mind and body are one,
we used to talk about
a mind body connection,
like I don't know, maybe
there was a rope or a chain
connecting them or something.
And you know, there
was even a debate
about whether or not there was
a connection prior to that.
We now know that they're the
flip side of the same coin,
that there is a physiology
and a biology to things
that we experience
mentally and emotionally.
And this study elucidates
that beautifully
between both papers
and the effects
that a distressing event has
on the brain and the rest
of physiology, including the
autonomic nervous system,
as well as subjective
ways that people feel.
And that when that
distressing event gets
neutralized, to a large extent,
that all of those things
change, that the brain
changes, that the rest
of physiology changes, that
subjective feelings of stress
and distress all change,
quality of life change.
So it's mind and body,
in that regard, are one.
>> I think that this data is
very important in providing
more knowledge about
the mechanism of action
of the neuro
emotional technique.
It helps us to understand
better what it's doing,
how it has an impact on
different parts of the brain,
and how it helps the
person to regulate
their emotional responses.
Now there could be some other
very interesting aspects,
because the cerebellum is
involved in our body's movement
and our motor function.
It appears that it
also helps to regulate
our autonomic
nervous system, which
was another part of this study
that showed that not only do we
change the way a person's
brain is reacting
to the emotional trauma,
but we change the way
the body reacts as well.
And the cerebellum apparently
is able to regulate
the autonomic nervous system in
terms of regulating heart rate
and blood pressure, which
were also measures that we
were looking at in this study.
And again, what we
were showing was
was that after the neuro
emotional technique,
people's heart rate responses
to the traumatic stimuli
were much more normalized.
They didn't have that
kind of over reactivity
that would that we
had seen before going
through the neuro
emotional technique.
So I think that this
really opens up an ability
to understand more and more
what the mechanism of action
is of the neuro
emotional technique.
It tells us a lot
about what we might
be able to learn in terms
of just traumatic memories
and traumatic and strong
negative emotions,
how they play out in the
brain, what areas of the brain
seem to be involved in
them, and provides us
a target for future studies.
>> Initially, I do not like the
term "alternative health care."
Bugs me, because this is
not alternative health care.
In fact, this is almost more
traditional than any other type
of health care that we have.
Because really, it's
saying, OK, you've
got what it takes to heal.
Let's unleash.
Let's unlock.
Let's help your body to heal.
>> If we start looking at
the body as mind as well,
it's not just the mind
that's in your head,
it's also the mind that's
down here in your gut,
that is just as much at play in
terms of creating your health
as the brain in your head.
>> We look at the body
as perfect the way it is.
And if there is a symptom
that's expressing,
it's because the
body needs something.
It needs attention in that area.
>> And emotions definitely
are not logical.
They're not rational.
Emotions are non-rational.
They're not irrational,
but they're non-rational.
They just are what they are.
Most of the universe
is non-rational.
Most of the universe is not
working on a rational plane.
Most of the universe
is just what it is.
Human beings apparently
have been given reason.
And we can work with our
reason to make life better
for ourselves.
But we can't rely
100% on reason.
We have to understand that
we're more than reason.
The body heals itself.
And NET kind of facilitates
that and kind of
makes it easier to do.
And it's just a process.
But through virtue
of this process,
it allows that which heals
to come forth and get
the healing done.
You know, they say, oh,
you helped me so much.
And yeah, I tried to
help you all right,
but your body healed itself.
I just want to remind
you of that, you know,
so we can get that
consciousness going out there
and start making that
part of the conversation.